---
layout: post
title: Direct Air Capture is both high prioirty in the near-term and only a small part of the solution
---


There’s an interesting new [paper](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-020-20437-0) out from Ryan Hanna et al. on the “Emergency deployment of direct air capture as a response to the climate crisis”. They model scenarios for huge deployment of direct air capture (DAC) in which countries plough money and effort into it on a war-like scale and find that with investment on the order of 1–2% of GDP annually, DAC could pull several Gigatonnes (Gt) of CO2 out of the atmosphere annually by 2050, and tens of Gt by 2075.

My first takeaway from this paper is that it demonstrates just how much DAC is not a silver bullet. This isn’t a criticism of the paper — it’s valuable to see the quantitative assessment of exactly why DAC can’t take the place of emissions mitigation. Putting 1–2% of GDP towards the technology, and stretching the limits of credibility with a several-fold increase in global energy use to power it, the impacts on temperature and CO2 ppm found by Hanna et al. are not overwhelming. The impacts are there, reducing temperature in 2100 by 0.1–0.2 degrees under the SSP2–4.5 scenario, but they’re an order of magnitude lower than the impacts of the emissions mitigation even in this very, very high deployment world.

We can put this into context by considering some broad estimates of mitigation costs. McKinsey put together [this chart](https://ourworldindata.org/how-much-will-it-cost-to-mitigate-climate-change) showing abatement cost and potential across many relatively cheap mitigation actions (<60$/tonne carbon). According to Hannah Ritchie of Our World in Data, if we put in place all these mitigation efforts, we’d reduce emissions below baseline by something like 65–70% and it would cost us on the order of one to several % of global GDP. This is more than an order of magnitude more CO2 removal per pound spent than the DAC case above. If this is the case, why pursue DAC at any significant scale? There’s at least two potential reasons.

First, comparing actions on a cost basis assumes you have the power to choose between them, but what if international cooperation over climate policy doesn’t work, and a significant number of countries refuse to play ball with reducing emissions? We typically imagine other countries could likely successfully bribe/compensate such countries into agreeing, but this is by no means certain for all emissions sources. In this case DAC has the major advantage that you don’t need anyone’s permission. You could imagine a world where several major powers have pretty much fully decarbonised, perhaps in 2055, but are powerless to force others to accelerate their pace, so turn to large scale DAC fleet roll-outs in desperation.

Second, imagine it’s the year 2100 and the temperature is, say 2.3C above pre-industrial. We’ve successfully mitigated emissions such that we are globally net zero, but we were very slow about it and have overshot our temperature target. Atmospheric CO2 levels are well above pre-industrial and will remain there for hundreds of years unless we actively remove CO2 (ignoring ocean uptake, which will help us out here). How much effort will we be prepared to expend to drop that temperature back down again? And more importantly, how pressing is the need to go back down? Would we be happy to do it over 300 years, or would the ice caps be melting at such a rate that a much faster temperature drop is needed. I’m not sure the answers to these questions exist, or at least I haven’t seen much conversation on them. But they’re critical.

Plausibly, climate harms could be mostly a one-time thing; once we’ve passed a particular temperature threshold, people are displaced, habitats are irreversibly damaged etc. such that going back down again 40 years later isn’t that worthwhile. I tend to imagine the opposite extreme is more likely though, where its the number of years you spend in a particular raised temperature world which counts, such that once we’re sat at 2.3C above pre-industrial in a net zero emissions state, it will be a race against time to bring the temperature back down whilst we continually endure climate harms. If this is true, then Hanna et al.’s paper provides an argument for doing a lot of DAC now, even given everything I’ve said above.

That argument is that with DAC, as with many novel technologies, given a large enough budget, the limiting factor on deployment ceases to be money. Essentially, if you haven’t given the technology time to work out its teething problems and grow over multiple generations of design, no amount of money can magic up an effective, large-scale infrastructure. Because of this constraint, the scale of initial deployment matters a lot for how much DAC you can achieve 20 or 30 years later. Ryan et al. find that by building 7.5 rather 5 plants in year one, net CO2 removals by 2050 are around 40% higher. Another way to see this is that under their deployment scenario there is roughly an order of magnitude greater removals of CO2 in 2075 than 2050. If we waited till 2045 before we started, you’d push this curve back such that it’d take you till 2075 just to hit the several Gigatonne mark.

The above makes the case that if you want the ability to do DAC on a meaningful scale, you need to get cracking straight away, even if you’re not achieving much in terms of carbon removal in the early years. However, there’s an important point I’ve glossed over, which is whether there are better ways to remove carbon from the air than DAC. If there are, and if these have the potential to scale far enough, then we wouldn’t need the large investment in DAC, even in a scenario where large negative emissions are desired. There’s a range of other methods available, including biomass carbon removal and storage (with or without energy generation, BECCS/BiCRS), tree planting, enhanced weathering, soil carbon storage and biochar. Most of these are likely to be cheaper than DAC, at least in the near to medium term, but all have their own challenges.

Looking in detail at the negative emissions potential of the full range of options for carbon dioxide removal is beyond the scope for today, but this [useful EASAC report on negative emissions technologies](https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/28_EASAC%20Report%20on%20Negative%20Emission%20Technologies.pdf) suggests they all start to come up against hard constraints, generally over land availability at deployments on the order of several Gt. For example, the report quotes a figure of up to approx. 0.1 hectares of energy crop per tonne CO2 removed per year using BECCS/BiCRS, which means you need on the order of a 100 million hectares of energy crop (6% of current arable land) for 1 Gt CO2 per year, and if you use forestry residues instead, you might need four times this much land.

I don’t want to push these very rough numbers too far, as there’s a lot of active research into working out the maximum feasible scale of these activities, especially BECCS/BiCRS. But to give a sense of the picture, if you wanted to meaningfully undo some fraction of global warming, this would mean reducing atmospheric CO2 concentration by numbers on the order of 100 parts per million (we have gone from 280ppm pre-industrial to 415 ppm as of early February 2021), which equates very roughly to 800 Gt CO2. If you wanted to remove this over 100 years, that’s 8 Gt CO2 /year, which is broadly similar to some of the assumed BECCS deployments in IPCC scenarios — in IPCC scenarios with a 66% or better chance of limiting temperature increase to 1.5°C, median CO2 removal by BECCS is 12Gt of CO2 per year in 2100. However, those IPCC scenarios have been strongly criticised, [the Grantham Institute’s “BECCS: A reality Check” briefing paper](https://www.imperial.ac.uk/media/imperial-college/grantham-institute/public/publications/briefing-papers/BECCS-deployment---a-reality-check.pdf) on this states clearly that “BECCS cannot deliver the scale of negative emissions required in current emissions projections”. Ultimately then, your position on whether DAC is worth a significant early effort is likely to be a function of how bullish you are on the prospects for large scale removal of CO2 by BECCS. But one can certainly imagine a situation where the world regrets not having developed the tech, if other means of carbon dioxide removal prove more problematic than the more optimistic forecasts.
